Hi there. This video is on GDB, which
is the GNU debugger. It may actually be
a little bit longer than some of the
other videos because GDB is a giant program
that you really need to learn how to
use for CS one zero seven. It's super
important that you learn how to use it.
You will get lots and lots of practice
using it, but you should, at least start
out by learning some of the basic commands
so that you don't get, overwhelmed when it
comes to having to debug some big programs
using GDB. GDB is a command line debugger
unlike what you may have used in Eclipse
or in QT Creator. So it's all on
the command line. Surprise, surprise, because we've been
doing all these videos are involved with command
line. But what we're gonna do is I'm
gonna show you some of the commands using
a program as an example so that we
actually get a real example here. Here's the
program I'm gonna use. It's called square dot
c and it's a pretty simple program. Basically,
there's a function called square, which takes an
integer and returns an integer. And then in
main, it actually says that it will square
an integer and what we're gonna do is
we're going to use a command line argument
to be the integer. So basically we're gonna,
in the end, type square and then some
number and it will just print out the,
it'll print the number that is, squared. So
that's it. It, looks at the arguments, sees
if it's actually, there and it will, then
try to square it using a c standard
library function and then it actually just runs
the program the function which is a very
simple program to square the number and return
the value. Okay. So how do we do
this? Well, we actually type g c c
and then dash g and dash o g,
that's an uppercase o not a zero, and
then and then the program name and then
dash o square and this will compile it.
Again, for our class, normally we're gonna use
make files, to do that, but in this
case I'm just gonna show you that we
we have to put the dash g and
dash o g to make the debugger, work
correctly in this case. Anyway, we can do
that and it compiles just fine. And then
if we type square, if we type square
by itself by the way, it says, hey,
you don't have the argument on there. So
you need to type dot square and then
some number. So if we type five, it
will say the program will square an integer,
five squared is 25. Alright. So our program
doesn't have any bugs, but we're gonna use
g b to actually look at it. And
what we can do is say g d
b and then square and it will load
the program up like this, and it gives
you all this, stuff about the the GNU
debugger. But when you see this little, parenthesis
GDB, that's the prompt that you're at for
GDB, meaning that you can start to type,
you know, the commands there. Okay? So what
are some of these commands? Well, one of
the first commands that you should probably know
is help. If you just type help, it
gives you some, it says, here's some types
of commands that you can do and so
forth. But if you happen to know the
command that you want to use, you just
type help and then the command. So for
instance, one command is list, list. Help list
and it says, okay, list the specified function
or line, etcetera. Okay. So if I typed
list main, because I know I have the
main function, it will show us at least
the beginning part, at least the first ten
lines of the program. Okay. If I typed
list square, it will actually list the it'll
give you the line number for the program.
And this is kind of cool. This is
all embedded into the binary file for square.
Actually, I think the list may be being
read off the from the actual file itself,
the c file itself. But it links them
together so that it knows what it's doing.
So anyway, the help command is super important
so that you know how to get help
if you need it. So that's the first
one you should probably know. Another one is
the info command. And if you have the
in the info command takes another command like
breakpoints or something like that and it says,
oh, there's no breakpoints right now. So a
lot of commands have, you can say info
and then something, and it will give you,
that information. Okay. Like info functions will give
you all the functions. In fact, info functions
gives you all the functions in that your
program has the potential of using, and that
would include all the standard library functions and
so forth. It's not necessarily the best command
to use. Okay. The next command I wanna
show you is the run command. The run
command, if we just type run, watch what
happens. It'll actually run the program and then
it will say this program square ninja, oh,
we never had a command line argument. Right?
So we didn't need to do that. Well,
the nice thing is you can say run
and then four and it will it will
actually run and, it will go all the
way to completion and then it will say
that it exited normally. Great. Okay. So that's
our program and it ran and and that's
fine. Okay? But the, what we wanna normally
do is stop the program somewhere in the
middle of it. Okay? So how do we
do that? We actually type a break command.
Okay? So let's say that we want to
break on the first line of the code,
break on main. So you can type break
main and it says, oh look, I'm gonna
create a break point on line six of
your code, which happens to be the line
where main actually starts. Okay? You can also
type a line number. So if I say
break, in fact you can just do b
for abbreviated, a lot of the GDB commands,
you can abbreviate. But if I say b,
let's say 10, then it will say oh
I'm gonna make a breakpoint on line 10.
If we had another file, we would type
b and then the file name and then,
the line number. Okay? So many times you'll
do that. Anyway, it will create a breakpoint
at that position. Now if we type run
four, then it will actually stop the program
at line six. Okay? And what's nice about
this is once you're stopped, if you just
type l for list, it will list around
where you stop. So notice it didn't just
list starting at line six, it listed around
where we stop. Okay? And so you can
kinda say, alright, look, I'm on, line six,
which is where the breakpoint is, and we
are, this is the code that's around it.
So that's kind of nice. Okay? If you
want to go to the, like, into the
program and actually start running line by line,
there's actually two different ways you can do
it. The next command abbreviated n will actually
take you to the next line in the
code and it will not go through, it
will not go into functions. So notice printf
is a function. Even though you didn't write
it, it's still a function. And if we
type n, it will run the next line
and step over the printf function. Okay? A
lot of times this is called step over
and it will do that line and then
end up on the next line, right, which
in this case happens to be line 10.
It's, by the way, it's telling us that
it's a breakpoint there too. And here's another
command, clear will clear the breakpoint at that
point. So we don't need any breakpoints anymore.
Watch this, info breakpoints. Right? And it says,
oh, we've got one breakpoint at line, at
main on line 6 and, it we've already
hit it one time. So it'll give you
some nice information about that. But anyway, now,
we've already typed a bunch of things here
and I say, well, where are we in
the program? Well, here's another command, where. Where
tells you exactly where in the program you
are. So we're at line 10 in square
Dot C. And if I do list, it
lists around that area. Right? So I know
I'm at line 10 and this is about
what I'm going to do. Okay? Now, the
other command that we could use besides next
or n is s or step. Now step
will do the similar thing, like in this
case, it will step through line 10 because
line 10 happens to be, it's not a
function. Right? It's just doing a a check
and it does this. So if I type
step, it will go to line 16. Okay,
because line 16 happens to be a, the
next thing because it stepped over the if
statement and it's not in the if statement.
Okay, now watch this, if I type step
again and if I type step again and
by the way just s works or actually
you could actually just type return, I mean
it will do the last thing again. If
I do return, uh-oh, watch this. Now it
says we're in the a t o I
function and it says return blah blah blah
and all this and you say, oh, now
I'm in trouble. Okay, because if I type
where, it will say I'm actually this, by
the way, where types an entire stack trace.
So it says now I'm in the ATOI
function and, on line 280, but you didn't
write that function. So what do you do?
If you keep typing step, you'll go now
into some other file and it even tells
you it can't even find that file. So
we've seen, it sounds like we're in trouble.
What you can do is you can type
finish and it will finish the current function,
do whatever it needs to do, and it
will, return you to the last function. Now
we happen to be two functions down. So
if I type where again, we're still in,
the ATOI function. But if I type finish
again, it will then bring us back to
our own program. Okay? So, so if you
accidentally step into a function that's not yours,
it may look a little scary, but there's
nothing to be worried about. Okay. So now
I'm on line 18 and I should have
used n to step over those two function
that function, but, that's the way it goes.
Now I actually want to step into this
function. Let's say I wanna go into, the
square function. If I type n, it will
actually, let's just do it. If we type
n, it will actually go into the function
and then be done. If I wanted to
actually go in or it will skip over
the function by doing it and then it
will be go to the next line and
then I'm now on line 20. So if
I want to step into that, I would
have to go back and rerun the program
and step into it. In fact, let's do
it. Okay, let's do this. Let's type a,
let's delete the first break point. Delete one.
Okay. That deleted the first break point. If
I type break on line 18 now, okay,
it will do that. And if I type
run and say four again, okay, it will
say, oh, the program being debugged to start
already. And you wanna say, oh, alright, well,
I know I'm restarting the program so you
can hit y. And it then broke on
line 18. So we're back to where we
were again and we are on line 18
and maybe we wanna go into the square
function. Okay? So if we wanna go into
the square function, we type s for step
and now look at this, we are now
inside our square function. If we type l,
we'll get a list of, oh, look at
this, that's where we are, we're on line
27 and we are inside our square function.
Very nice. Okay. Now once we're in the
square function, we can do a couple things
and here's a couple more commands that you
that you might want to want to know.
If you want to figure out what a
variable value is, you can type print or
just p and then the value name. Okay?
So p x says that, x is four
and it actually gives it a little, number
that you could refer to later, but it
says, it's four. So x is four and
that's good because that's what we passed into
our function. Okay? If I type p s
q for square, well, what line are we
on by the way? We are on line
27. Okay. We're right here. We're about to
do this line. We haven't done it yet.
We're about to do this line. Okay? And
it says square is four, well that doesn't
make any sense. Turns out that it hasn't
been, initialized yet so it's just some, kind
of random value. Okay? In fact, we'll learn
about what that value might be a little
bit later. But let's do this, let's do
next to step over this line 27. Okay.
And now we're on line 29, but guess
what, we can type p s q again
and now it will say that s q
has become 16. Okay? If you type n
again, it will go back outside the function,
back to the original function and we can
actually do n to print f and if
we wanna do n to continue, it'll keep
going and so forth and if you keep
hitting n, it will continue like that. Okay?
So those are a whole bunch of interesting
commands. Let's let's run it again. By the
way, I think if you just type run
right now, it will assume that you meant
to use the same command line as before
and so, so it does. So it actually,
did say that it was gonna run with
four. I'm not sure how you would go
and run it again without any command line
arguments at this point. But anyway, let's step
into the, square function again. And so now
we're at line 27 in here. And if
we type where, it says, oh look, you're
in the square function and that was called
from main. Okay? And don't worry about all
the details of the other other things here.
By the way, you ever see optimized out
for a variable name, it means that it's
not available right at this point in time
and in fact it may not be available
and you have to do some other things
to find it out. But sometimes that happens
with variables. You get them optimized out because
GCC thinks it knows a little better than
you. Alright. And, so anyway, we are in
square and, we're at line 27, but let's
say we wanted to look at what main
was, go back to where main called it
from, we can actually use the up command
to go back to the calling function and
be in the calling function. So if we
wanted to find out what num to square
was, we can do up and then type
print num to square and it will tell
us that it's optimized out. So this is
a situation where you go, oh, at this
point it's already used that value so it's
already done something where it can't get get
the value. But many times you'll be able
to get the the previous previous variables like
that. But anyway, we're in main right now
so if we wanna go back to our
calling function we can type down and it
goes okay now you're back at at make.
So if we type print s q, it'll
say four and that was the value that
was that was passed in. So not much
you can do about some of the optimized
out things, but there are there are some
tricks you can use if you really need
to get the variable as we as you
go through there. So what else do I
wanna show you? I showed you most of
the basic commands. You will use all the
commands we talked about like very extensively. A
couple other commands that are we're gonna use
later in the class, there's the disassemble command,
which is like this. Okay? And be careful,
your eyes may bleed. We will learn all
about this later. Before I disassemble, it says
that this is the function square. So the
square function looks like this and this is
actually the assembly code for it. Okay. GCC
produces from your c code assembly code that,
we will learn about in the class. So
it's kind of fun and it actually is
doing, it's moving some, values into registers, we
will learn all about what those values are,
later. And then it's multiplying them and that's
kinda what we're doing. And then it is
returning from the function. So we will learn,
learn all about that. So let's actually go
back to main function. If we type disassemble
now, I think it's just disas is all
you need to type, it actually shows what
main is and all of this is what
main is doing. Main is not a particularly
long function but that's what it's doing. So
you will use this, you will use this
pretty frequently once we get to assembly language.
So disassembling says, okay, I've got my c
code and now I'm gonna see what the
actual machine code or the assembly language code
that the compiler produced looks like. So it's
kind of fun. I think you'll enjoy it
when we get to it. Alright. There's one
other thing I do wanna show you which
is, a special mode. If you type control
x control a, brings you into this mode
called TUI mode. And what's nice about this
is you can actually scroll up and down
and it tells you where the breakpoints are.
Like for instance, there's a breakpoint on line
18 right there and right now we're on
line 20 and we type, I'm not sure
why it just went up to there. Sometimes
you need, it's a bit buggy sometimes. If
you type control L it will refresh the
screen. Let's see, might have been because we're
inside the program but I am not a
% sure right off the top of my
head how we can make that bigger. But
control X control A goes back again, let's
see control X control A now, it's not
gonna be smaller like this. Let's see, where
are we here? We're in main, line 20,
let's just run it again. Start from beginning,
line 18, control x, control a, yeah, I'm
not sure why it is so small but
I'll define that up. But anyway, point is
if I type s, it will actually step
into the function up here and I can
continue to run my commands down here. So
it's in a slightly nicer way, once you
make the window a little bit bigger to
actually, to work with your code. So it
makes a little bit more user friendly than
just the command line arguments. Okay. So that
is to get out of gdb just type
quit and then if it says still active
it will it will actually quit. So you
have to type quit and oops quit and
then enter, maybe not, quit. Let's see, to
return you're gonna quit. I think you have
to type control x control a and then
quit and then it will say yes, right.
So anyway, that's GDB in a nutshell, in
a very very small nutshell. You will use
GDB very very very very often in CS
one zero seven and you should get used
to it as quickly as you can. Thanks.